---
layout: post
title: Why an iPhone without a headphone port can, and will, succeed.
comments: true
categories: [analysis]
tags: [news, prediction]
description: An analysis and prediction of why and how the iPhone will survive even without a headphone port.
---
By now, many will have heard the rumour that Apple will be [abandoning the venerable 3.5mm headphone port](http://www.forbes.com/sites/gordonkelly/2016/01/06/iphone-7-loses-headphone-jack/) in the upcoming iPhone 7. While I will withhold my judgement of the actual phone until the reviews come in, I find this decision to be a great opportunity to explore two facets of Apple's business that sets them apart from everyone else. Specifically, Apple has a superior understanding of the average consumer and Apple will thoroughly prepare its hardware and software ecosystem to support new major design decisions. I believe that these two qualities are a major reason for Apple's success in the past and that these will also be the reason the iPhone 7 won't be a flop, even without a headphone port.

To demonstrate these qualities, lets take a look at the announcement of the original MacBook Air.

###We've Been Here Before
In mid-January 2008 (ancient history in internet years) Apple announced the [first MacBook Air](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacBook_Air) at Macworld. At the time, this was the thinnest, lightest laptop to have ever been produced weighing in at 3 lbs, with a maximum thickness of 0.76 inches. This was also the first laptop in recent memory to be announced that did not have a built-in disc drive or Ethernet port (the MacBook Air was not the first laptop without a disc drive, but earlier laptops lacking it included an external peripheral drive). These were features that were ubiquitous on all personal computers at the time, and the idea of a computer without them was rather hard to digest.

The public and media response to these missing features was mixed. Many were glad to be rid of a disc drive that they rarely used anymore, but most were unsure if the Air could succeed financially without features considered so integral to computers. In retrospect, we can see that by 2008 the time was ripe to introduce a computer without a disc drive or Ethernet port. Broadband internet had just passed [50% penetration in US households](http://www.dailywireless.org/2012/05/07/us-broadband-sub-count/), bringing WiFi along with it. WiFi hotspots in restaurants and cafes had also [become relatively common by 2008](http://www.pcworld.com/article/149620/wifi.html). With the rise in broadband internet penetration came a increase in internet-centric services and the beginnings of the cloud, with Netflix streaming, Hulu, and Dropbox (to name a few) all launching in 2007. Looking at this information, it's rather obvious why the Air didn't flop, but at the time it was very unclear how well the Air would do. The real question though, is how Apple knew that this was the right decision to make, and it comes back to this understanding the average consumer and ensuring ecosystem support.

* ####Apple Understands the Average Consumer Better
Apple, and,at the time, Steve Jobs had a strong comprehension for how the average consumer used their electronic devices (and they still do). What Apple understood in 2008 was that many, if not most average consumers were connecting to WiFi for internet instead of using a wired connection. In addition, they saw that use of the disc drive was falling rapidly as more software and media content either became available for download or streaming on the internet. Apple understood that, as a result of these trends, the disc drive and Ethernet port no longer formed a part of core features required by the average technology user, and that these features could be safely removed without depriving the user of functionality that they need. It was this comprehensive understanding of user and marketplace trends that allowed Apple to perceive the right time to retire these features.

* ####Apple Creates the Ecosystem to Support New Big Design Decisions
Simply being able to predict the correct time to release a radically new product does not ensure the success of that product, however. Apple had to make sure that the removal of the disc drive and Ethernet port was as transparent to users as possible. To this end, introduced extensive support in its unified ecosystem to enable the Air. By the time the Air was introduced, iTunes had offered [movies and TV shows for purchase since 2005](http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2005/10/31iTunes-Music-Store-Sells-One-Million-Videos-in-Less-Than-20-Days.html) and a new software feature called Remote Disc allowed the Air to commandeer the disc drive of any computer on the same local network. To support the adoption of WiFi, Apple announced the Time Capsule version of its AirPort wireless router at the same time as the Air. The Time Capsule had an integrated hard drive, making it an attractive pairing option for the Air, which only had 80GB of onboard storage. Apple rarely operates without a safety net for fallback, however, so in addition to the mentioned ecosystem support, Apple also had the SuperDrive and Ethernet USB dongle as optional peripherals for users who still needed the legacy support.

The commercial success of the MacBook Air was the result of many contributing factors, including a loyal customer base, easily excitable media, and a unified hardware/software ecosystem, among other things. The role of these factors in the success of the Air should not be understated, however they don't really explain the whole picture. When considering that Apple has a better understanding of trends in consumer use cases, it becomes relatively obvious how Apple can correctly predict when the time is right to introduce a new feature or remove and old one. The success of that prediction is then subsequently explained by the extensive support that Apple provides within its ecosystem. And as a result of these two qualities, the MacBook Air had a lasting and permanent impact on the laptop market, with most premium laptops on the market today lacking both a disc drive and an Ethernet port.

Taken together and applied to other decisions that Apple has made over the years, these qualities work to dispel some of the hocus- pocus surrounding Apple's tendency to make the right decisions before everyone else.  

###Wireless Audio is the Trend that will Enable the iPhone 7
Returning to the iPhone 7, the question is how will a phone with a headphone port not flop? If you hadn't guessed it already, the answer is wireless audio.

The circumstances surrounding the MacBook Air strongly resemble those surrounding the rumor of the iPhone 7. Apple is poised to remove a widely used standard connector in order to push wireless audio and an unprecedented new device form factor. Many are unsure if a phone can succeed without a headphone port yet, even if the idea of eliminating headphone cables is very tempting. However, lets take a step back and try to look at this like we did with the MacBook Air. Wireless audio is becoming very popular as new technology has enabled more and better wireless audio devices. Advances in Bluetooth hardware and software support has enabled power efficient Bluetooth audio devices like headphones and speakers. Streaming services such as Spotify offer remote control functionality to control music playing one device from another. The trend in wireless audio is strong and increasing every month. 

Not only is the trend there, but Apple is already preparing for ecosystem support for an iPhone without a headphone port. AirPlay, which allows streaming of music over a wireless network, has been around since 2004 and the iPhone has had the ability to remotely control iTunes for some time now. Additionally, Apple subsidiary Beats announced the [Powerbeats2](http://www.beatsbydre.com/earphones/MKPQ2.html) in December, and, increasingly, the acquisition of Beats appears to have been a strategic move to prepare for the release of the iPhone 7 based on [new rumors about the iPhone 7](http://www.macworld.com/article/3020384/consumer-electronics/iphone-7-will-feature-new-wireless-earpods-by-beats.html). Further, based on information from the [Forbes article on the iPhone 7 rumors](http://www.forbes.com/sites/gordonkelly/2016/01/06/iphone-7-loses-headphone-jack/), Apple is also working on additional support including new audio profiles for the iPhone and headphones that plug directly into the Lightning port to take advantage of special HiFi audio profiles. And finally, Apple plans on selling a Lighting to 3.5mm adapter for the iPhone 7.

With the iPhone 7, Apple isn't merely betting that wireless audio will make the iPhone 7 work, they **know** it will work because they're prepared to support it. However, this situation isn't quite the same as the MacBook Air. I'm willing to bet that there will be two versions of the iPhone 7, one with a headphone port and one without, for those that simply cannot survive without it. Additionally, Apple's loyal customer base is going to be much more important for the success of the iPhone 7 than it was for the MacBook Air, largely because the cool factor of owning the skinniest phone has worn off a lot in the past few years. Regardless, when we look at the rumors about the iPhone 7 in conjunction with the trends in wireless audio, it is clear that Apple has planned well for the iPhone 7. The iPhone 7 will very likely succeed in spite of its lack of a headphone port and Apples decision will later be widely regarded as a wise decision.

Discussion is one of the main reasons I decided to start this blog, so if you have comments, criticisms, corrections, or other thoughts on this piece I'd love to hear them.





 


